3.2 Project Idea 2: Deep Learning Breast Cancer Detection


What problem is this project solving, or what is the project idea?


The aim is to establish if Deep Learning assisted X-ray mammography can improve the


accuracy of breast cancer screening. The project will achieve this aim by modelling the


Digital Database for Screening Mammography (DDSM) with convolutional neural networks


(CNNs).


What is the background and context to the question or project idea above?


The UK national health service (NHS) launched, in early 2025, a major research project


to address the above research question. If successful, a DL system could replace one of


the two radiologists currently reporting on scans with the consequence of faster diagnos-


tic turn-around and the liberation of specialists for other tasks. CNNs are deep learning


neural networks that apply a succession of filters to the input layer. They are capable of


impressive image recognition tasks.


Here are some recommended sources for you to begin your research.


•
Wang L. Mammography with deep learning for breast cancer detection. Front Oncol.


2024 Feb 12;14:1281922. doi: 10.3389


https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2024.1281922


PMID: 38410114; PMCID: PMC10894909.


•
Lee, R., Gimenez, F., Hoogi, A., Miyake, K. K., Gorovoy, M. & Rubin, D. L. "A curated


mammography data set for use in computer-aided detection and diagnosis research.",


Sci Data 4, 170177 (2017).
https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2017.177


•
Francois Chollet (2018). Deep Learning with Python. Manning, Shelter Island


•
https://www.tensorflow.org


What would the final product or final outcome look like?


A CNN statistical model, predictions from this model and comparisons to specialist re-


porting accuracy.


What would a prototype look like?


A small CNN capable of achieving statistical power.


What kinds of techniques/processes/CS fundamentals are relevant to this project?


Artificial neural networks; dataset splitting, model building with tensorflow, training and


testing.


What would the output of these techniques/processes/CS fundamentals look like?


One or more test metrics for the best statistical model trained on the DDSM dataset.


How will this project be evaluated and assessed by the student (i.e. during iteration of


the project)? What criteria are important?


The student will seek to improve the chosen test metrics by network scaling up and regu-


larisation.


For this brief, what might a minimum pass (e.g. 3rd) student project look like?


A working CNN that at the minimum has statistical power. Some attemot to follow the


Depp learning workflow, as described in the text book by Chollet.


For this brief, what might a good (e.g. 2:2 – 2:1) student project look like?


A succession of regularised CNN networks; strict adherence to the Deep Learning work-


flow.


For this brief, what might an outstanding (e.g. 1st) student project look like?


Application of transfer learning (e.g. VGG models), and any of the alternatives listed in Ta-


ble 3 of Wang 2024. For a high first: near publishable results for an original model that is


competitive with the best reported DL models in the literature.